Monroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson on June 1, 1926, at Los Angeles General Hospital in the neighborhood of Boyle Heights, Los Angeles, California, United States. Her mother, Gladys Pearl Baker (née Monroe), was born in Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico to American parents from the Midwestern United States, specifically Indiana and Missouri, who were temporarily living in Mexico for work. The family quickly returned to the United States, moving to California while Gladys was an infant.  At the age of 14, Gladys had married John Newton Baker, an abusive man nine years her senior. They had two children together, Robert and Berniece. Gladys successfully filed for divorce and sole custody of her two oldest in 1923, but Baker kidnapped the children soon after and moved with them to his native Kentucky. Monroe first learned about her sister at the age of 12 and met the latter for the first time in her late teens.

Following the divorce, Gladys worked as a film negative cutter at Consolidated Film Industries. In 1924, she married Martin Edward Mortensen, but the union lasted only a few months, although they did not legally divorce until four years later. Gladys named Mortensen (misspelled Mortenson) as Monroe's father in the birth certificate, but most of Monroe's biographers agree that this was unlikely as their separation had taken place well before she became pregnant. According to biographers Fred Guiles and Lois Banner, Monroe's father was likely Charles Stanley Gifford, Gladys's superior at RKO Studios, with whom she had an affair in 1925. This was supported by a comparison conducted in 2022 between Monroe's DNA and that of one of Gifford's descendants.

Although Gladys was mentally and financially unprepared for a child, Monroe's early childhood was stable and happy. Gladys placed Monroe with evangelical Christian foster parents Albert and Ida Bolender in the suburban town of Hawthorne. Gladys also lived there for six months until she was forced to move back to the city for employment. She then began visiting Monroe on weekends. In the summer of 1933, Gladys bought a small house in Hollywood with a loan from the Home Owners' Loan Corporation and moved Monroe in with her. They shared the house with lodgers, actors George and Maude Atkinson and their daughter, Nellie. In January 1934, Gladys had a mental breakdown and was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. After several months in a rest home, she was committed to the Metropolitan State Hospital. She spent the rest of her life in and out of hospitals and was rarely in contact with Monroe. Monroe became a ward of the state; Gladys's friend Grace Goddard took responsibility over the affairs of the former and Monroe.

For the next 16 months, Monroe continued living with the Atkinsons and may have been sexually abused during this time. Always a shy girl, she developed a stutter and became withdrawn. In the summer of 1935, she briefly stayed with Grace and the latter's husband, Erwin "Doc" Goddard, and two other families. In September 1935, Grace placed Monroe in the Los Angeles Orphans Home. The orphanage was "a model institution" and was described in positive terms by her peers, but Monroe felt abandoned. Encouraged by the orphanage staff, who thought that Monroe would be happier living in a family, Grace became her legal guardian in 1936 but did not take her out of the orphanage until the summer of 1937. Monroe's second stay with the Goddards lasted only a few months because Doc allegedly molested her. She then lived for brief periods with her relatives and Grace's friends and relatives in Los Angeles and Compton.


Monroe with her first husband, James Dougherty, c. 1943–44. They married when she was 16 and divorced in 1946, when she was 20. Monroe's childhood experiences first made her want to become an actress: “I didn't like the world around me because it was kind of grim ... When I heard that this was acting, I said that's what I want to be ... Some of my foster families used to send me to the movies to get me out of the house and there I'd sit all day and way into the night. Up in front, there with the screen so big, a little kid all alone, and I loved it.”

Monroe found a more permanent home in September 1938, when she began living with Grace's aunt Ana Lower in Sawtelle. Monroe was enrolled at Emerson Junior High School and went to weekly Christian Science services with Lower. She excelled in writing and contributed to the school newspaper, but was otherwise a mediocre student. Owing to the elderly Lower's health problems, Monroe returned to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in about early 1941. That same year, she began attending Van Nuys High School.

In 1942, the company that employed Doc relocated him to West Virginia. California child protection laws prevented the Goddards from taking Monroe out of state, and she faced having to return to the orphanage. To avoid this, it was decided that she leave high school and marry their neighbor, factory worker James Dougherty, who was five years her senior. The marriage took place just after her 16th birthday, on 19 June 1942. Monroe found herself and Dougherty mismatched, and later said she was "dying of boredom" during the marriage. In 1943, Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine and was stationed on Santa Catalina Island, where Monroe moved with him.



